Good morning, everybody.
I'm Rob, and today we have a good crowd.
We're going to be talking about
NetBoot and network installation.
This is a portion of the
Jaguar 10 server product.
My name is Rob Neville.
So this session is a little bit
different from a lot of sessions that
we have here at WWDC in that the NetBoot
and network installation products or
portions of the server products are not
specifically geared around the developer
community producing products on top of.
The NetBoot and NetInstall
products are useful and are going
to be utilized by your customers,
hopefully, and also by probably,
as I look around the room
and see some familiar faces,
probably a lot of you all in the room.
In past years, what we've found,
and this is the first year we've been
talking specifically about this product,
that there are quite a few of you
here who are actually users of the
server product specifically and the
NetBoot and NetInstallation product
that we're going to be delivering
to you in the next couple of months.
And your users of the product,
your people who actually install
and run and have customers
who live on top of this.
And we're going to be gearing a
lot of our talk today about that.
If, however,
you are developing... There are some
things that you should keep in mind.
There potentially are some things which,
if you want to have your software
installed in this environment,
that you're going to
have to pay attention to.
So, NetBoot, it's coming in a new flavor.
NetBoot for Jaguar,
we've got a variety of
new types of offerings.
We're going to be able to give
you NetBooting for Mac OS 9,
the same way as we do today,
and Mac OS X.
In addition, we're going to be supporting
network installation.
As part of that process,
we're going to give you in the
X environment some new tools for
customizing both your NetBoot
and your NetInstall images.
I want you to know that this is going
to be part of the Jaguar server product,
but it's not part of the developer
CDs that you all received.
Those of you who are interested received
a Jaguar 10 server CD that was available.
This is not on that disc.
NetBoot images in and of themselves,
for those of you who are
familiar with the product,
can get to be quite large.
The actual packaging of that is still
being worked out in some fashion.
We decided that it was just too much data
to be able to give you this particular
product at this particular time.
So what we're going to talk about today,
what do I want you to take out
of this particular session?
For those of you who are
not familiar with NetBoot,
we're going to be talking a little
bit about what the product is,
where it's come from, NetBoot on 9.
We're going to tell you what's different
and what's the same about NetBoot on 10.
We're going to talk about network
installation and what that means,
how that works, things that you're going
to need to watch out for.
And we're going to talk a little
bit about the tools we have for
customizing this particular installation.
and customizing your netboot images.
[Transcript missing]
Pretty powerful stuff.
This is a power tool.
And for those of you who are implementing
and deploying this particular tool,
the capabilities of it are not simple and
not real easy to configure and set up.
This is not something which you want
to give to a trivial administrator
or someone who maybe administrates
adding users to your file server,
those kinds of things.
There are a lot of different
steps to this process,
and as we add the possibility
of doing network installations,
you're really going to want to keep some
control over this particular process.
NetBoot for 9.
What is NetBoot?
NetBoot is the ability for a Macintosh
to mount or come up or boot from a
disk image that's out on a server.
Currently,
the current product that we have today
and the product that we've shipped
from the first iteration of Mac OS X,
a couple of years ago now,
is a version of Mac OS 9.
We ship it on four flavors.
The four flavors we ship are the
four languages that we support.
Those languages come in images.
The images reside in a CD.
The CD gets installed in the
system in a specific location.
You can boot up to 50 clients in
the current iterations against that.
It's a read-only volume.
We have shadow files on the hard drive,
on the local server hard drive,
that allow for write space.
You can boot a 9 image.
We gave you tools to allow
you to modify that image.
They were a little bit tedious,
a little bit ponderous,
but allows you to put things into
the... Some of you have used the tool,
I can tell from the laughter.
[Transcript missing]
More productive experience when
you're modifying your 10 images.
So, now we get into some of the
stuff that's really new,
and that is we're going
to be NetBooting 10.
I'm kind of excited about
being able to NetBoot 10.
From my particular standpoint,
this makes my life a whole lot easier
on the other products that I manage,
in that now that I've got
multiple image support,
if I'm running a version of Jaguar,
and we iterate those occasionally
to add features and to fix
bugs and things before we ship,
and I need to regress,
find out when a particular feature
went in or stopped working,
I can now NetBoot that image.
And I don't have to install the
whole thing to find out whether or
not that functionality was there.
So you can NetBoot an installation
to test whether or not you've got
a particular configuration for your
users if you're installing this.
You can create multiple copies
of 10 to install and test to see
whether or not you've got the right
mix of applications for your users.
The other nice thing about it is,
and what we've found,
though I'm not going to be making
any sort of performance comments,
Promises at all.
But what we found is that the
experience that you have with X is
that you boot to the login window.
And that may take some amount
of time because you're loading
the kernel and you're loading a
bunch of the underlying pieces.
But you do that once.
And then when the users,
they tend not to,
like they did with Mac OS X,
they tend not to shut down.
They tend to log out.
So now you're sitting
there at the login prompt,
which is running.
And you log out and you log back in.
And that experience for your
users is going to be much faster.
So, we're also providing a new image,
a new tool for modifying the images,
and we call it the Network Image Utility.
Very catchy name, it's the new tool.
And the other thing to consider,
and I think this is going to
help those of you who work in a
more enterprise kind of setting,
is we're going to be booting,
today we're going to be
booting over NFS for Mac OS X.
What that allows you to
do is to put your images,
of various multiple images,
allows you to put it on big
iron in the back and point to
it from your Mac OS X server
and just mount it over NFS.
It gets exported over NFS.
The server is what,
the image file itself is HFS+, but
where you can store it and where it gets
mounted from and loaded from is over NFS.
So it gives you a little
bit more flexibility.
So we also support classic
inside the Mac OS X image.
But, there's a big but here.
We don't install it for you.
With NetBoot for X,
ostensibly what we did was we
gave you four localized images.
Well, we did that because you used them.
If you didn't use them,
you would have given us some
sort of feedback and told us you
didn't need them or want them.
But you use these localized images.
And we don't know which particular
version of the OS or which localized
version of the OS that you want.
So basically what we have is the tool
that we use will create a 10 boot image.
and then what you need to do
is you need to mount that.
So it's a disk copy image,
so you just mount it like you
mount any other disk copy image.
And then what you do is you
go get the version of 9.2.2
that you want to install,
insert that,
install that system into the image.
Well, so now you've got an
installed image there,
and if you stop there and every
time you started up the machine,
your users would get the
experience of running through
the setup assistant for Mac OS X.
So you don't want them
to have that experience.
What you do is you then,
with that image still mounted read-write,
you point your classic startup at
the image that you just installed.
And then you launch it.
And you configure it how you will.
Save your file,
and now you have something
where you can launch.
Basically, your users can launch classic.
Okay.
We are not supporting
being able to NetBoot.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, now some of you are
giggling and laughing,
but we've had that request and there
is some logic behind that request.
The ability to,
the same reason you'd use NetBoot in the
first place is because you want to be
able to only support one known image,
read-only.
So that's why people wanted to be
able to NetBoot their classic folder,
but we don't support that.
So the caveat here is you're
doing the installation,
so we're not going to
be holding your hand.
If you want to install a
non-supported version of 9
that Classic won't launch with,
knock yourselves out.
Your users aren't going
to be able to use it.
And that's the other reason we recommend
that you test these installations
before you roll them into production.
So what's network installation?
Well, the short answer for network
installation is that network installation
is Netbooting to the installer.
So what does that give me?
Well, that gives me a couple of things.
First, it gives me the ability to take
what in essence is the user
CD that you get with Jaguar,
Put an image of that on the server and
now have everybody in your enterprise
or in your school or wherever,
you know, whatever community is seeing
that particular server.
It allows them to install
without having to have the CD.
So, well, that's good,
but I tend not to install OSs every day,
so that's not, maybe not be real useful.
Now, it might be extraordinarily
useful for the times when,
if you're in charge of the new
equipment coming into your enterprise,
and you want to make sure that it's
got the latest version of the OS on it,
or the version that you're supporting,
maybe not the latest,
but the version you're supporting,
then you can just come in,
have these things run a NetInstall
as soon as they come in the door.
The other thing you can do is
you can put your apps on it.
You can also,
since it boots to the installer,
you can take out the OS and
put whatever applications,
utilities, scripts, customized widgets,
anything you want,
into the install package
and have it install.
[Transcript missing]
I give out to my
particular customer base,
CPUs.
I own them.
I may not want to give them
root access to those machines,
and yet I want to be able to
update their software or to
install new bits on their disks,
but I don't want to give them
root access to the machine.
So how can I do that?
Well, in this particular way,
what you can do is you can say, you know,
Run site licensed app install.
The installer is running his root,
and it'll install all the
bits in the right place.
So you don't have to give
the user the root password,
so you can still keep
some modicum of control.
The other thing,
and this is where we get into a
little bit of the power tool area,
is you can automate these installations.
You can run these things.
Currently, you run an installer and it
asks you a series of questions.
A lot of times,
you're just clicking the arrow.
Sometimes, you have to really enter data.
For those of you who want to
do unattended installations,
we're giving you that capability.
If you want to do some level
of attended installation,
we're giving you that capability as well.
With this capability,
we're giving you responsibility.
We're giving you the authority.
We're giving you the
power to do nasty things.
So how does NetBoot work?
For those of you who aren't
familiar with the product,
NetBoot works similarly
in both environments.
I won't go into the original
NetBoot that shipped way back when,
because that works a
little bit differently.
In general,
the way the current NetBoot works
is the clients that you see,
they request,
after they get a DHCP address
from whatever DHCP server you
happen to have on your network,
they make a BSDP request over DHCP to
discover a multicast for a server.
and the first server that they get
that responds to them will be the
server that they attempt to boot from.
And that's if they don't
do anything at all.
So if I come in,
I haven't configured my machine at all,
I hold down the hardware interrupt,
which is the N key, and I want to boot,
it's going to do a broadcast,
it's going to find the first
responding NetBoot server.
And for 9, what it's going to do,
it's going to TFTP down the boot ROM,
then it's going to
mount an image over AFP,
and you're up and running.
For 10, what's going to happen is it's
going to download the kernel,
then it's going to establish
an NFS session to the server,
and it's going to load your
root partition over NFS.
We give the users another
mechanism for doing that.
Once you've made that connection,
you are then bound.
The server knows about you,
you know about the server.
That data is stored on the
machine in parameter RAM.
So next time you NetBoot,
it's going to try and
NetBoot to the same server.
So, the trick is,
what if the server that it
NetBooted from goes away?
Well,
then it's going to try and NetBoot again,
and it's going to find another server.
Well, now it's going to bind
to that new server.
So that if I have two servers
and I'm NetBooting from server A,
and then server A goes away,
and next time I NetBoot from server B,
I'm going to continue to NetBoot from
server B even if server A comes back.
So that's the unattended installation.
However, we are giving you new
tools to be able to pick,
since we now have multiple images.
We're giving you the
capability to pick those.
Network Image Utility This is
going to allow you to ostensibly
create NetBoot images.
I was talking to a gentleman
earlier before the session and
Quite frankly,
I want to be out of the business
of providing NetBoot images.
Every time a CPU ships,
every time there's a new widget that
our wonderful people in the CoreOS ship,
every time we rev the system or
produce a software update or a fix,
I have to rev NetBoot.
That's a lot of overhead.
It also, it's also I'm making the
assumption for you about what
it is that you want or need.
So what I'd like to do is get out of
the business of creating NetBoot images.
And the way I'm going to do that is
I'm going to give the ability to you.
And the way that we're doing that in 10
is through the network image utility.
and through disk copy, ostensibly,
is you're going to be
able to create images,
mount them with disk copy,
modify them to your heart's
content in a much easier fashion
than you could with NBDA.
We're going to allow you to
create boot images from CDs,
and then you
from Installation Discs.
We're going to give you new system
preferences and control panels
to allow your users to pick which
image they wish to boot from.
What you see here is a sample screenshot
of the Mac OS X network image utility.
Now, what I mean by sample screenshot,
I can see it, so you can see it too.
Enable classic on the image?
That's not there.
System folder path?
In other words, the UI is going to be
a little bit different.
However, it's going to be a single user
interface that comes up that
will allow you to create either a
NetBoot image or a NetInstall image.
Why would I want to differentiate
between NetBoot and NetInstall?
Well, let me think.
So my user comes up and they just
see a couple of images and they say,
oh, let me try booting from that one.
Well, when they boot from that one,
it erases their primary hard
drive and installs the new
operating system onto it.
Oops.
That's a lot different experience from
just booting to the latest version of
the OS and still having the contents
of their hard drive available to them.
So we want to give the users at
least some graphical user interface
to be able to differentiate between
a boot image and an install image.
Now your installers are going to be
really nice and they're not going
to erase people's hard drives,
except in the lab situations where
you're controlling all of the machines.
You're going to just do things
like incrementally update
your favorite applications.
You're going to write a NetBoot,
a NetInstall image for your suite of apps
if you're a third party developer out
there that you can just distribute so
that one of the options your users have
is to NetInstall your suite of images.
One of the things which
we're also including,
this is just reminding me
and this isn't in the slides,
but that I want to talk a
little bit about is licensing.
For those of you who happen
to be developers out there,
we're now giving the users
with Mac OS X the ability
to site license install.
And that's the way you can
install the operating system.
Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait.
But that comes with some caveats.
You guys who are site licensing have to
do some things according to the license,
like take responsibility that
the users who do the install are
going to live up to the license.
You have to do some trivial things
like on an internal corporate website,
put the license agreement.
There's some I's to cross and T's to dot.
But what you need to remember is
if you're developers out there,
you can also give your users
the capability of doing that.
And you might need to take some time
and talk to your attorneys to figure
out what the licensing agreement might
look like if you're going to give
the users the ability to do that.
So the end users are going to love it.
They're absolutely going to love it.
But especially with an automated install,
you could have someone,
i.e., most of you,
answering yes to do you accept this
license agreement and not the person
who is actually using the software.
So you have to watch out for that.
This is an example of the
startup disk in Mac OS X.
I believe on your CDs that you
got for Mac OS X Jaguar that this
is the version that is in the OS.
However,
none of you have my new NetBoot server,
so none of you are going to see this.
These icons may change a little bit.
However, what you can see is you can see
you've got NetBoot disk for 9.
It should be 9.2.2 probably.
A Mac OS X 10.2 network disk.
You can have multiple
versions of this if you wish.
You can have as many as you want.
Also network installation.
You have a NetInstall disk if
somebody wanted to install it.
And you can see what the
differentiation between the,
that green arrow may turn red.
It may change a little bit,
so don't hold me to the graphics per se,
but in addition,
you can have multiple servers
serving multiple images.
So that's a lot of
bandwidth on your networks.
There's a lot of you probably
aren't going to do that,
but you can do that.
You can do that.
Okay, so automating your installation.
This is, I think,
this is where we're now getting
into the power tool arena.
Because you can automate,
you can bypass portions of
this with an XML script.
You can have some interaction
to no interaction.
We're hoping to be able to
provide you with a default
Wait screen, like your primary hard
drive is about to be erased.
You have 30 seconds to cancel something
if you don't wish this to occur.
However, I think in most of the cases...
When you all write the XML scripts
to bypass the installation
and answer yes to a series
of questions that create a default
username and all that other stuff.
You're not going to give the
user the ability to bail.
However, if you're giving the users the
ability to install a series of
applications on a particular CD,
I mean on a particular location or
particular partition where they wish,
so you've got a suite of
site-licensed software,
and you want to give your
users the ability to pick
[Transcript missing]
I'm going to hit this home probably,
you know, for the next 30 minutes.
You can unintentionally create situations
which cause your users to lose data.
You will be responsible for that.
You are the ones who are going to
be writing the XML scripts that
tell the computer to do that.
I am just providing you with the tools.
This is an example of, if I want to buy,
you all want to, you're asked for this,
you want a table saw.
If you go to a school situation,
you see the table saw,
you see a guard over the
blade in the school shop.
You take that same table saw,
you take it out to a construction site
where they're building your house,
or to a lumber yard, where's the guard?
Who knows where the guard is?
Probably the same place
as somebody's fingertips,
but there's no guard.
And we're giving you a table saw.
And we're giving you a guard.
And if you take the guard off,
and some of your users cut
off the tips of their thumb,
There are no defaults.
We are not providing you with
a default automated install.
We are going to show you how
you can remove the guard.
We are not giving you a sample
table saw with the guard removed.
So there are two types of
installations using our install tool.
There's a minimal install,
It comes up with no confirmation,
though we may add one with this,
what I told you about, you know,
you have 30 seconds to remove this
tape or the CD will self-destruct.
But there is a progress bar,
and you auto-restart.
So there may be a small alert saying,
you know, we're getting ready to
install Mac OS X to the best
operating system on the planet.
We're not going to give you
do you wish to continue,
do you wish to stop, right?
And then we continue.
And then there's a confirm method
where the panel allows you to pick
what volume you want to install on.
It's got an OK button before it,
so it doesn't do anything.
The user selects the targeted volume.
It's similar to the experience
that you have today with a CD.
and where we do this, and again,
this is an ever-changing
[Transcript missing]
It was called install tool
when I created these CDs.
It was called install tool when I gave
these CDs to the people who made
them pretty and were putting them up.
But between then and now,
they changed the name.
I believe it's called Installer.
Shaking your head.
You back there yet?
It's called Installer.
We're not going to go into a
great deal of depth because
my team is not responsible
specifically for the installer,
but ostensibly I'm going to go
through what you're allowed to do.
This thing,
a variety of optional parameters.
The optional ones are
the ones in brackets.
You can get a list of the packages
that are allowed to be installed.
You can get a list of the volumes that
are available with the volume info.
You can get help.
Wow.
You can get a list of what metapackages
are to be installed or to find which
ones are supposed to be installed.
You can designate the path
that you wish it to go to.
Be very careful on this.
Your users may have changed
the names of the volumes,
so unless you nuke them and rename them,
it's not going to be a problem.
You can designate what's
the default language.
This could be very useful in
determining a pre-configured
setup for your installations.
You can save these parameters out.
This is really good in debugging
and in testing your configuration.
Most of these are here,
so you'll have a list of these.
When this material is available to you,
you'll be able to access this
and refer back to it again.
Formats.
These are options to format
the output to an XML file,
designate the path of the XML file,
have it in verbose mode,
check the versioning.
The name of the port to
send the progress info to.
You might want to send that
progress information out some
port other than the video port.
You may be interested
in viewing it remotely.
Other things to watch out for.
This is new technology.
Some of the technology on
X is new functionality,
though the technology is the same.
However, network installation, I
differs greatly from NetBooting.
And how is that?
When I Netboot my image on 10,
it brings me up to the login window.
I execute the login window.
The kernel's loaded.
The Windows server's loaded.
Everything's loaded.
I log in.
It launches the finder.
The finder's running.
And I launch individual
applications as I need them.
And I'm basically running 10.
That data is sometimes being
read off of a mounted disk image
that's mounted over the network.
With the installer, what you're doing is
you're mounting the OS,
you're launching the installer,
and it's copying files from that
read-only image over the network.
That's a lot of data.
We do installations at
Apple of the operating system.
We do those sometimes over the network.
We sometimes send out
emails to people saying,
"Please, everybody,
don't install at 10:00 in the morning.
If you can help it,
install a little later."
Because what happens is,
even at a big corporate
network like Apple's,
if you have 5,000 users all
doing that kind of installation,
it's very slow.
And we have a fast network.
So it's much bigger than NetBoot.
And NetBoot is,
for those of you who are currently,
how many people currently use NetBoot?
10-15% of the audience.
You know, it can take up a considerable
amount of bandwidth.
This is not something that
you want to do over airport.
and not just because of airports,
you know, the fact that if I stand in
front of an airport base station,
you might not get a good signal.
It's because of the bandwidth, right?
So...
Network installation takes up more.
You may want to have more,
if you're going to be handling
network installations,
you may want to have more
than one server doing them.
So the other thing to watch out for is,
so we're giving you this
networked image utility.
And that allows you the ability to take
[Transcript missing]
We don't do any error checking for that.
We don't know that the
bits you put on the disk,
because ostensibly all I'm
doing when I'm NetInstalling is
I'm booting to the installer.
Well, I don't check to see whether or
not the OS is going to boot to
the installer or the login window.
I rely upon you to turn that flag on so
that when the control panel comes up,
You see an install image.
So that's up to you.
Pre-flight, pre-test up your setups.
You're going to have a lot of
cut-off thumbs if you don't.
A lot of cut-off thumbs.
only use unattended
installs when required.
[Transcript missing]
and always, always,
always give users a warning beforehand
if you're going to do something
that they may not know about.
So, I'm going to get you out
of here a little bit early,
unless you have tons of questions.
So, in summary,
we've got a new version of NetBoot.
The new version of NetBoot
supports multiple images.
It supports Mac OS 9 and Mac OS X.
The technology supports,
you can have a Mac OS 10.2.
If there is a 10.2.1 or a 10.2.2,
you can have those as well.
You can have different flavors of 9.
You can have your Japanese 9 image.
You can have your English 9 image,
your German 9 image.
You can have your 9 image with
applications installed on it.
You can have your plain vanilla 9 image.
You can have your kiosk 9
image or your kiosk 10 image.
Those kinds of things.
Network installation.
We're giving you the capability of
installing the software over the network.
You're going to be able to
take the Mac OS X Server,
set it up,
and upgrade your users to Jaguar.
You're going to be able
to set up a Jaguar 10,
10.2 installation and use that
to install it over at your site.
But with this functionality,
we need you to use it carefully.
So a couple of cleanup items here.
For those of you who were here
on Monday at 3:30 and at 5:00,
we had an overview of
the Mac OS X Server.
We had -- and then that was followed
by the Mac OS X Server in depth.
Those talked about the other -- a lot
about the other portions of Mac OS X.
Some of you I recognize from
being at that session and may
have been asked questions.
I want to thank you all for coming.
This is a really great turnout
for a technology that I think
is just now really starting to
mature and really starting to be
a really useful tool for you all.
And if you're developers,
what I want to stress to you is use
the package format wherever possible.
This will allow you to leverage
off of our technology to do network
installations for your customers.
For you people who are actually
going to be deploying this,
we're trying to give you the
tools so that you have the
capability and the customizability.
We're also giving you the responsibility.
Who to contact?
If you have questions or technical
kinds of issues that you wish to raise,
features that you wish to give, myself,
Tom Weir, who's a network and
communications evangelist,
will be joining me here in a minute.
If you have complaints
or you have problems,
use the appropriate channel for those.
I'm not going to turn anybody away,
but there are mechanisms that we
need to facilitate the use of and
need to make sure things get tracked
correctly so we know we are making the
right decisions at the right times.